



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 C. Eckel
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         February 11, 2014
Expires: August 15, 2014


         Application Enabled Open Networking Problem Statement
                 draft-eckel-aeon-problem-statement-00

Abstract

   Identification and treatment of application flows are critical for
   the successful deployment and operation of applications based on a
   wide range of signaling protocols.  Historically, this functionality
   has been accomplished to the extent possible using heuristics, which
   inspect and infer flow characteristics.  Heuristics may be based on
   port ranges, IP subnetting, or deep packet inspection (DPI), e.g. by
   an application level gateway (ALG).  Current trends in application
   deployment, usage, and traffic renders such techniques less effective
   and/or result in compromises to application security or user privacy.
   A better solution is required that allows applications to explicitly
   and willingly communicate flow characteristics to the network, and
   that allows the network to communicate what it can provide as
   feedback to applications.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           AEON Problem Statement            February 2014


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Typical Workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Limitations of Existing Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Efforts in Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Networks today, whether public or private, are challenged with
   demands to support rapidly increasing amounts of traffic.  New
   channels for creating and consuming rich media are deployed at a
   rapid pace.  Pervasive video and on demand access are becoming second
   nature to consumers.  Communication applications make extensive use
   of rich media, placing unprecedented quality of experience demands on
   the network.  All available capacity is saturated at whatever rate it
   is added.

   Now more so than ever before, identification and treatment of
   application flows is critical for the successful deployment and
   operation of applications.  These applications are based on wide
   range of signaling protocols and deployed by a diverse set of
   application providers that is not necessarily affiliated with the
   network providers across which the applications are used.

   Historically, identification of application flows has been
   accomplished using heuristics, which inspect and infer flow
   characteristics.  Heuristics may be based on port ranges, IP
   subnetting, or deep packet inspection (DPI), e.g. by an application
   level gateway (ALG).  Each of these techniques suffers from a set of
   limitations, particularly in the face of challenges on the network
   outlined previously.

   Port based solutions suffer from port overloading and inconsistent
   port usage.  IP subnetting solutions are error prone and result
   increase network management complexity.  DPI is computationally



Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           AEON Problem Statement            February 2014


   expensive and becomes a greater challenge with the wider adoption of
   encrypted signaling and secured media.  An additional drawback of DPI
   is that the resulting insights are not available, or need to be
   recomputed, at network nodes further down the application flow path.

2.  Typical Workflows

   Various heuristic based approaches are used prevalently and
   successfully for two types of workflows:

   1.  Provide network operators with visibility into traffic for
       troubleshooting, capacity planning, accounting and billing and
       other off network workflows.  This is done by exporting observed
       traffic analysis via protocols such as IPFIX and SNMP.

   2.  Provide differentiated network services for the traffic according
       to network operator defined rule sets, including policing and
       shaping of traffic, providing admission control, impacting
       routing, permitting passage of traffic (e.g. firewall functions),
       etc.

3.  Limitations of Existing Solutions

   These typical workflows, visibility and differentiated network
   services, are critical in many networks.  However, their reliance on
   inspection and observation limits the ability to enable these
   workflows more widely.  Reasons for this include the following:

   o  Simple observation based classification, especially ones relying
      on TCP/UDP, ports often result in incorrect results due to port
      overloading (i.e. ports used by applications other than those
      claiming the port with IANA).

   o  More and more traffic is encrypted, rendering DPI impossible, or
      much more complex, and sometimes at the expense of privacy or
      security (e.g. need to share encryption keys with intermediary
      performing DPI).

   o  Observation generally requires inspecting the control and
      signaling traffic of applications.  This traffic may flow through
      a different network path than the actual application data traffic.
      Impacting the traffic behavior is ineffective in those scenarios.

   o  Observation of control, signaling and data traffic with DPI will
      in general result in less insight into the applications intent
      than if the application was explicitly signaling its intent to the
      network.




Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           AEON Problem Statement            February 2014


   o  Without explicit involvement of the application, network services
      leveraging DPI traffic classification impact the application
      behavior by impacting its traffic, but cannot provide explicit
      feedback to the application.  This results in a lost opportunity
      for the application to gain insight and cooperate with the
      network.

4.  Efforts in Progress

   There are a variety of existing and evolving signaling options that
   can provide explicit application to network signaling and serve the
   visibility and differentiated network services workflows where DPI is
   currently being used.  It seems clear that there will be no single
   one-protocol-fits-all solution.  Every protocol is currently defined
   in its own silo, creating duplicate or inconsistent information
   models.  This results in duplicate work, more operational complexity
   and an inability to easily convert information between protocols to
   easily leverage the best protocol option for each specific use case.
   Examples of existing and evolving signaling options include the
   following:

   o  RSVP is the original on path signaling protocol standardized by
      the IETF.  It operates on path out-of-band and could support any
      transport protocol traffic (it currently supports TCP and UDP).
      Its original goal was to provide admission control.  Arguably, its
      success was impacted by its reliance on router-alert because this
      often leads to RSVP packets being filtered by intervening
      networks.  To date, more lightweight signaling workflows utilizing
      RSVP have not been standardized within the IETF.

   o  NSIS (next Steps in Signaling) is the next iteration of RSVP-like
      signaling defined by the IETF.  Because it focused on the same
      fundamental workflow as RSVP admission control as its main driver,
      and because it did not provide significant enough use-case
      benefits over RSVP, it has seen even less adoption than RSVP.

   o  STUN is an on path, in-band signaling protocol that could easily
      be extended to provide signaling to on path network devices
      because it provides an easily inspected packet signature, at least
      for transport protocols such as UDP and SCTP.  Through its
      extensions TURN and ICE, it is becoming quite popular in
      application signaling driven by the initial use-case of
      automatically opening up firewall pinholes and determining the
      best local and remote addresses for peer-to-peer connectivity
      (ICE).

   o  PCP is a protocol designed to support use cases similar to UPnP
      firewall traversal.  It also can easily be extended to provide



Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           AEON Problem Statement            February 2014


      more generic application to network signaling for traffic flows.
      Unlike the prior protocols, it is not meant to be used on path
      end-to-end but rather independently on one "edge" of a traffic
      flow.  It is therefore an attractive alternative (albeit with
      challenges under path redundancy) because it allows the
      introduction of application to network signaling without relying
      on the remote peer.  This is especially useful in multi-domain
      communications.

   o  Depending on the devices where it is performed, different degrees
      of DPI may be used to achieve explicit signaling.  For example,
      inspection of HTTP connections is often viable in high-touch
      network devices.  Such inspection may provide explicit signaling
      if the application purposely keeps or inserts information elements
      that are meant to be signaled to the network in the clear, or
      knowingly uses an encryption scheme shared with the network.

   Rather than encourage independent, protocol specific solutions to
   this problem, this draft calls for a protocol and application
   independent solution that can be applied in a consistent fashion
   across a variety of protocols.  The solution should:

   o  allow applications to explicitly signal their flow characteristics
      to the network

   o  provide network nodes visibility to application flow
      characteristics

   o  enable network nodes to contribute to application flow
      descriptions

   o  allow applications to receive resulting flow descriptions as
      feedback from the network

   o  complement existing heuristic based mechanisms

   The solution should not:

   o  compromise the privacy or security of applications, their end
      users, or network nodes

   o  preclude the use of existing heuristic based mechanisms

5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Toerless Eckert, Reinaldo Penno, and Amine Choukir
   for contributing much of the original content.




Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           AEON Problem Statement            February 2014


Author's Address

   Charles Eckel
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: eckelcu@cisco.com










































Eckel                    Expires August 15, 2014                [Page 6]
